Steve Jobs, the MPEG LA and HTML5's \<video\>.
==============================================

On March 7, Google
[announced](http://blog.webmproject.org/2013/03/vp8-and-mpeg-la.html
"on the webM project blog") they reached an Agreement with
[MPEG-LA](https://pinboard.in/u:hugoroy/t:MPEG-LA/ "articles about
MPEG-LA in my pinboard") around patents that “may” cover the [open
video codec VP8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VP8 "Wikipedia
article on VP8").  

Thanks to this agreement, the most serious
concerns that people had about using VP8 and webM for their videos
on the web are gone. (Well, almost, because Nokia(/Microsoft)
[claims to have patents infringed by VP8
still](https://lwn.net/Articles/545562/ "LWN's excellent article
on the patents war around VP8")).  

Monty from
[Xiph.Org](http://www.xiph.org "the Xiph.Org Foundation"),
developer of free software and open video codecs like
[Theora](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theora "Wikipedia article
on Theora") is [very
happy](http://xiphmont.livejournal.com/59893.html) about this
announcement. Indeed, it shows that MPEG-LA has lost. They did not
have anything serious to bring VP8 down. 

But what should remain
from this? I think there are some lessons to learn here for Free
Software. Sure, MPEG-LA has lost. But who won? Not us, and surely
not the Web. 

The whole saga starts from the HTML5 group. Bear in
mind that this effort started outside of the W3C, comprising
mainly of browser-vendors including Apple and Microsoft. I don't
have enough knowledge of the inside politics of this group. But
what remains out of it is that one of the most discussed features
of HTML5, the \<video\> element, is a failure. 

Why's that a
failure? Because today, it seems that most of the time HTML5
videos are encoded solely using the
[restricted-by-patents](http://www.mpegla.com/main/programs/AVC/Pages/Agreement.aspx
"MPEG-LA's patent licensing agreement excludes Free Software")
[AVC/H.264](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/H.264/AVC "Wikipedia
article on H.264/AVC") format. That means that publication on the
Web is now restricted by rules determined by a cartel of patent
holders (The MPEG-LA has been under investigation by the US
Department of Justice for anti-trust concerns [since
2011](http://gigaom.com/2011/03/04/doj-investigates-mpeg-la%E2%80%99s-webm-patent-pool/).)
This is certainly not how the web was envisioned. The web was
envisioned with freedom at its core. Just like Tim Berners-Lee
didn't have to ask anybody's permission to [make the Web work 22
years ago](http://blogs.fsfe.org/hugo/2010/12/the-web-is-20/ "The
Web turned 20 in 2010")[¹](#fn-cern-pd), nobody should have to ask
anyone's permission to publish something on the web. 

* * *

1.  Actually, TBL did have to ask someone's permission: his
employer, CERN. But it's totally unrelated ;-) [↩](#ref-cern-pad)

